Can Pink Elephants Exist:
Mapping the Logic–Memory Conflict in LLMs
Eashaan Thakur and Hemang Joshi and Naman Singhal
Introduction to NLP Course Project
IIIT Hyderabad
{eashaan.thakur, hemang.joshi, naman.s}@research.iiit.ac.in

Abstract
We investigate why large language models
(LLMs) frequently fail at negation. We frame
this as a mechanistic conflict between automatic factual retrieval, implemented in FeedForward Networks (FFNs), and late-stage inhibitory logic, implemented via specific attention heads. We introduce the Signal-to-Gate
Ratio (SGR) to quantify the competition between retrieval and suppression. Using TransformerLens, we build a full analysis pipeline
that computes Direct Logit Attribution (DLA),
per-head DLA, activation patching, and artificial amplification experiments on GPT-2 Small
and Pythia-160M over the entire CounterFact
dataset (21,919 and 19,562 prompt pairs respectively). Our initial results show that GPT-2
Small exhibits an 11.4% negation failure rate,
with a mean SGR of 244.6, strongly supporting
the Competitive Gating Hypothesis that hallucinations arise when memory retrieval physically
overwhelms inhibition.

1

Introduction

To process negation, a model must resolve a distinct conflict in its residual stream, which acts as
the model’s main information highway. Internal
recall mechanisms push hard for the most likely factual completion based on training frequency. Meanwhile, the presence of a negation token (such as
“not”) must trigger a secondary circuit to specifically block that high-probability output.
Behavioural studies liken this to the psychological “Pink Elephant” effect, or ironic process theory:
the instruction to avoid a concept paradoxically increases its activation (Vrabcová et al., 2025). However, we still do not fully understand how neural
networks physically implement this conflict.
We propose the Competitive Gating Hypothesis. Factual recall acts like a reflex: it retrieves

the most probable token regardless of logical context. The negation operator acts as a secondary
gatekeeper that must “undo” this work in the final
layers. This paper maps the battlefield between
these two forces and identifies the Crossover Point,
the layer where logic either overrides the memory
signal or fails to contain it.
Our contributions are:
1. A novel metric (SGR) that quantifies the
retrieval–inhibition conflict as a single scalar
per sample.
2. A complete, reproducible, seven-stage mechanistic pipeline tested on the full CounterFact
dataset.
3. Empirical evidence that artificial amplification
of Inhibition Heads causally reduces negation
failures.

2

Related Work

2.1

Memory vs. Logic

Geva et al. (2021) and Dai et al. (2022) show that
Feed-Forward Networks (FFNs) act as key–value
memory stores. Mid-to-late FFN layers serve as
“attribute extractors,” injecting entity data into the
residual stream independently of logical structure.
2.2

Finding the “Off Switch”

Wang et al. (2022) established a framework for
identifying circuits—subsets of model components
responsible for specific behaviours. Their analysis
of the Indirect Object Identification (IOI) task revealed several functional classes of attention heads,
including inhibitory heads that suppress competing tokens and redirect probability mass toward the
correct completion.

2.3

Failures of Negation

• Positive: “The capital of France is”

LLMs frequently behave as if they are “logic-blind.”
Truong et al. (2023) showed that scaling up model
size does not fix negation failures. Vrabcová et al.
(2025) demonstrated that mentioning a concept in
a negative context makes it statistically harder for
the model to generate diverse alternatives.

3

Transformer Architecture and Core
Concepts

3.1

The Residual Stream

Every transformer layer updates a shared vector:
rl+1 = rl + attnl + ffnl .

(1)

• Hard negation: “The capital of France is not”
We also plan soft negation (“is unlikely to be”) for
future experiments.
Tokenisation caveat. GPT-2 / Pythia tokenisers expect a leading space on bare words
(e.g., " Paris"). Our pipeline validates singletoken targets via model.to_single_token
and skips multi-token targets automatically.
4.2

Direct Logit Attribution (DLA)

Because the residual stream is a sum of component
outputs, we decompose the final logit (Eq. 2) into
per-component contributions:

At the final layer the logit for token t is simply:
logit(t) = WU [:, t]⊤ rfinal .

logit(t) =
(2)

Understanding the residual stream therefore means
understanding everything the model computes.
3.2

Attention Mechanism

Each attention head computes queries, keys, and
values, then mixes value vectors weighted by attention scores. Some heads attend to negation tokens;
others copy factual information forward. Attention
is information routing.
3.3

Feed-Forward Networks

Each layer’s MLP is FFN(x)
=
W2 GELU(W1 x).
A key interpretability
insight is that FFNs behave like key–value memory
stores (Geva et al., 2021): mid-layer FFNs
strongly store entity–attribute associations. In our
framework:
• FFNs = memory retrieval,
• Attention heads = control / suppression.

4

Methodology

4.1

Models and Data

We act as “neuroscientists” for GPT-2 Small (12
layers, 12 heads, 768-dim) and Pythia-160M (12
layers, 12 heads, 768-dim) using TransformerLens
(Nanda and Bloom, 2022). We use the CounterFact dataset (Meng et al., 2023), a benchmark of
counterfactual scenarios. Each entry provides a
prompt (e.g., “The mother tongue of Danielle Darrieux is”) and a target token (e.g., “French”).
For each entry we construct a prompt pair:

X

rc · WU [:, t]

(3)

c

A positive DLA means the component pushed toward the target; negative DLA means it pushed
away. This lets us ask: “How much did layer 6
FFN push toward Paris?” “How much did layer 10
attention suppress it?”
4.3

Signal-to-Gate Ratio (SGR)

For a negated prompt we define the SGR as the
ratio of total positive FFN (retrieval) DLA to total
negative Attention (inhibition) DLA:
P
[DLAℓ ]+
(4)
SGR = P ℓ∈FFN
h∈Attn |[DLAh ]− |
where [·]+ retains only positive (retrieval) contributions from FFNs and [·]− retains only negative (inhibitory) contributions from attention heads. When
SGR > 1 retrieval overwhelms inhibition and the
model is predicted to hallucinate; when SGR < 1
inhibition wins and negation succeeds.
4.4

Per-Head DLA and Inhibition Head
Identification

We
decompose
attention
DLA
to
the
individual
head
level
using
cache.stack_head_results().
For
each head (l, h) we compute DLA on both the
positive and negated prompt. Heads with a large
∆DLA = DLApos − DLAneg are candidate
Inhibition Heads: they promote the target on the
positive prompt but suppress it on the negated
prompt. We rank all 12 × 12 = 144 heads and
select the top-k for amplification (§4.6).

4.5

Activation Patching

Metric

GPT-2 Small

Pythia-160M

21,919
11.4%
244.6
27.1
58.0%

19,562
12.4%
23.3
7.7
99.3%

Prompt pairs
Negation failure rate
Mean SGR (finite)
Median SGR
SGR > 1 rate (all)

To test causality (not just correlation), we perform
activation patching:
1. Run the positive prompt and cache all
residual-stream activations.

Table 2: Behavioural summary across models.

2. Run the negated prompt; at one chosen layer,
replace the negated activation with the positive one.

5. Splits DLA into FFN (retrieval) and Attention
(inhibition) totals.

3. Measure how the target logit changes.
6. Computes SGR (Eq. 4).
If restoring layer l’s activation causes the target
logit to increase sharply, that layer was causally
performing suppression. We patch residual-stream,
MLP, and attention outputs separately to localise
effects.
4.6

8. Stores per-layer DLA arrays as pipe-separated
strings for downstream analysis.

Artificial Amplification

If a head is an Inhibition Head but its output is
too weak to overcome FFN retrieval, scaling it
up should reduce the target logit on the negated
prompt. We hook into selected heads via TransformerLens and multiply their outputs by a scalar
α ∈ {0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4}. We sweep α on both individual prompts and the full dataset, measuring how
the negation failure rate changes.

5

7. Detects the Crossover Point: the first layer
where cumulative inhibition exceeds cumulative retrieval.

Experimental Pipeline

After the benchmark loop, the pipeline runs perhead decomposition, amplification sweeps, and full
statistical analysis.

6

Results and Progress So Far

6.1

Dataset Coverage

The full pipeline completed successfully on both
models:
• GPT-2 Small:
skipped).

Our codebase is organised as follows:
Module

Purpose

load_dataset.py
load_models.py
run_benchmark.py
sgr_analysis.py
per_head.py
amplification.py
metrics.py
run_pipeline.py

Prompt-pair construction
Model loading
DLA + SGR computation
SGR visualisation
Per-head DLA
Head amplification
Statistical tests
Orchestrator

21,919 prompt pairs (0

• Pythia-160M: 19,562 prompt pairs (2,357
skipped due to multi-token targets).
6.2

Table 1: Codebase structure.

For each CounterFact entry the pipeline:
1. Constructs a positive and negated prompt pair.
2. Runs both through the model
model.run_with_cache().

with

3. Decomposes the residual stream
cache.decompose_resid().

via

4. Projects each component onto WU [:, target]
to get DLA.

Behavioural Results

GPT-2 Small exhibits an 11.4% negation failure
rate, and Pythia-160M a slightly higher 12.4%
(z = −3.27, p = 0.001). GPT-2’s mean SGR of
244.6 is dominated by tail cases with very weak
inhibition; the median (27.1) gives a more representative picture. Pythia-160M has a much lower mean
SGR of 23.3 (median 7.7), indicating its inhibition
circuit is generally stronger in absolute terms, even
though its failure rate is marginally higher.
6.3

SGR Distribution

Figure 1 shows the SGR distribution, colour-coded
by whether negation failed. Both distributions are
heavily right-skewed. For GPT-2 Small, 58.0% of
all samples have SGR > 1, while for Pythia-160M
the figure rises to 99.3%. Importantly, SGR > 1 is
a necessary but not sufficient condition for negation

Figure 1: SGR distribution across CounterFact samples.
Hatched bars indicate negation failures. The dashed line
marks SGR = 1. Note: the “SGR > 1 rate” annotated
in the figure refers to the fraction of failure cases with
SGR > 1, not the overall population rate.

Figure 3: Negation failure rate vs. SGR threshold.
Higher SGR correlates with more frequent failures.

Figure 2: Mean per-layer DLA on negated prompts.
Left: FFN (retrieval). Right: Attention (inhibition).
Rows: success vs. failure.

failure: many prompts with SGR > 1 are still suppressed correctly, suggesting that additional circuitlevel factors (e.g. the absolute magnitude of inhibition, or the presence of multiple suppression
heads acting in concert) modulate the final outcome. Among failure cases specifically, 99.1% of
GPT-2 failures and 100% of Pythia failures have
SGR > 1, strongly supporting the diagnostic value
of the metric.
6.4

Per-Layer DLA Analysis

Figure 2 shows the mean per-layer DLA on negated
prompts, split by FFN and Attention contributions.
Rows separate successes from failures. Critically,
the FFN heatmap shows strong positive contributions in mid-layers (5–9) regardless of negation outcome, confirming that memory retrieval is logicblind. The Attention heatmap reveals that suppression is concentrated in the final layers and is
notably weaker in failure cases.
6.5

SGR vs. Failure Rate

Figure 3 plots the negation failure rate as a function of SGR threshold. Higher SGR is strongly
associated with higher failure probability, provid-

Figure 4: Top: target logit vs. inhibition head amplification scale (single prompt). Bottom: dataset-level
negation failure rate vs. scale.

ing direct empirical support for the SGR metric as
a predictor of negation failure.
6.6

Amplification Experiments

Figure 4 shows the results of artificially scaling
the output of the top-10 Inhibition Heads. On the
left, the single-prompt sweep shows that increasing the scale factor narrows the gap between the
positive and negated prompt logits: the logit on
the negated prompt does not fall uniformly, but
the retrieval–inhibition gap (logitneg − logitpos )
closes systematically as α increases from 0.5 to 4,
indicating that inhibition is gaining ground against
retrieval. On the right, the dataset-level experiment
confirms that the negation failure rate drops from
12.0% at α = 1 (baseline) to 6.0% at α = 4, providing causal evidence that the identified heads are
genuine Inhibition Heads.

Figure 5: Cross-model comparison of SGR distributions and negation failure rates (GPT-2 Small vs. Pythia160M).

Figure 6: Per-head DLA heatmap. Left: positive prompt.
Centre: negated prompt. Right: ∆DLA (positive −
negated). Target token: “Paris”.

6.7

Cross-Model Comparison

Figure 5 compares SGR distributions and failure
rates between GPT-2 Small and Pythia-160M. Despite having a substantially lower mean SGR (23.3
vs. 244.6), Pythia-160M has a marginally higher
failure rate (12.4% vs. 11.4%, z = −3.27, p = 0.001).
This reveals an important nuance: the absolute
magnitude of SGR is not the sole predictor of failure; the shape of the inhibition distribution matters.
Pythia has 99.3% of samples at SGR > 1 vs. GPT2’s 58.0%, meaning Pythia has very few samples
where inhibition convincingly dominates. Both
models show significant Spearman correlation between SGR and failure (r = 0.15 for GPT-2, r = 0.11
for Pythia, both p < 10−50 ), supporting the Competitive Gating Hypothesis across architectures.
6.8

Per-Head DLA Heatmap

Figure 6 shows the per-head DLA decomposition
on the canonical “capital of France” example. The
delta panel (right) highlights specific heads that
react most strongly to negation; these are our candidate Inhibition Heads.
6.9

Proposal Element

Done?

Location

Residual stream decomposition
Direct Logit Attribution (DLA)
Per-layer FFN vs. Attn DLA
Signal-to-Gate Ratio (SGR)
Crossover Point detection
Per-head DLA decomposition
Inhibition Head identification
Activation patching (causal)
Artificial amplification
CounterFact dataset integration
GPT-2 Small support
Pythia-160M support
Statistical tests (Spearman, CI)
Hard negation (“is not”)
Soft negation (“unlikely to be”)
Patching in main pipeline

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Planned
Planned

run_benchmark.py
run_benchmark.py
run_benchmark.py
run_benchmark.py
run_benchmark.py
per_head.py
per_head.py
transformerLenstest.py
amplification.py
load_dataset.py
load_models.py
load_models.py
metrics.py
load_dataset.py

Table 3: Proposal element coverage. All core techniques
are implemented; soft negation and pipeline-integrated
patching are planned.

outputs has the largest causal effect on suppression.
Integration of patching into the full dataset pipeline
is planned.

7

Gap Analysis: Proposal vs.
Implementation

We systematically verified the codebase against
every element of the original proposal. Table 3
summarises the status.

8

Planned Experiments and Timeline

8.1

Completed

• Full DLA + SGR pipeline over 21,919 (GPT2) and 19,562 (Pythia) prompts.
• Per-head DLA and inhibition head ranking.
• Amplification sweep (single-prompt and
dataset-level).
• Statistical analysis: bootstrap CIs, Spearman
correlation, Mann–Whitney tests.
• Cross-model comparison infrastructure.

Activation Patching (Exploratory)

Activation
patching
experiments
(reported
in
our
exploratory
script
transformerLenstest.py)
confirmed
that patching mid-layer residual stream activations
from the positive into the negated run restores the
target logit, while patching late-layer attention

8.2

Ongoing

• Analyse Pythia-160M results in detail and
compare SGR distributions.
• Integrate activation patching into the main
pipeline for dataset-level causal analysis.

8.3

Planned

• Hard negation audit: Examine a broader
set of hard negation examples to identify semantic patterns associated with hallucinations,
specifically which entity types or prompt
structures consistently produce negation failures.
• Soft negation: Append “unlikely to be” instead of “not” and compare SGR distributions.
We expect weaker inhibition in smaller models.
• SGR<1 verification: Audit cases where
SGR < 1 to rigorously verify the Competitive
Gating Hypothesis. All observed negation failures correspond to SGR > 1; confirming that
SGR < 1 cases are consistently suppressed
would provide complete validation of the hypothesis.
• Crossover analysis: Histogram the crossover
layer across the dataset; correlate crossover
depth with SGR and failure.
• Extended amplification: Sweep finer scale
grids; test whether amplification helps Pythia
more than GPT-2.
• Larger-model generalisation: Expand the
analysis to comparatively larger models (e.g.
GPT-2 Medium/Large, Pythia-410M) to test
whether the Competitive Gating Hypothesis
generalises beyond small-scale architectures.
• Ablation: Remove individual inhibition
heads to confirm causal necessity (complement to amplification).

9

Expected Results and Discussion

If our Competitive Gating Hypothesis is correct,
we expect:
1. FFN memory retrieval to be identical in positive and negated prompts (early layers, “logicblind” recall).

5. Artificial amplification of Inhibition Heads to
reduce failure rates, confirming a causal role.
Our preliminary results already support points 1, 2,
4, and 5.

10

Reproducibility

The
full
codebase
is
available
https://github.com/karma-skz/
INLP-Project-S26. To reproduce:

at

conda activate inlp-project
python run_pipeline.py \
--models gpt2-small pythia-160m \
--max_samples 200
Dependencies are listed in requirements.txt
(PyTorch,
TransformerLens,
HuggingFace
Datasets, matplotlib, seaborn, scipy).

11

Conclusion

We presented the Competitive Gating Hypothesis
and implemented a complete mechanistic pipeline
to measure and intervene on the competition between memory retrieval (FFNs) and logical suppression (attention heads). Early results for GPT-2
Small show an 11.4% negation failure rate and a
mean SGR of 244.6, strongly supporting the hypothesis that hallucinations arise when the “volume” of the memory circuit exceeds the “damping”
capacity of the logic circuit. Next steps include
soft negation experiments, pipeline-level activation
patching, and extended cross-model analysis.

References
Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao
Chang, and Furu Wei. 2022. Knowledge neurons in
pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8493–
8502, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

3. Soft negation to produce weaker inhibition
than hard negation.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer
Levy. 2021. Transformer feed-forward layers are keyvalue memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

4. Hallucinations to occur precisely when
SGR > 1, when retrieval magnitude exceeds
inhibition magnitude.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan
Belinkov. 2023. Locating and editing factual associations in gpt. Preprint, arXiv:2202.05262.

2. Negation suppression to appear only in late
attention layers.

Neel Nanda and Joseph Bloom. 2022. Transformerlens.
https://github.com/neelnanda-io/
TransformerLens. Accessed: 2026-03-08.
Thinh Hung Truong, Timothy Baldwin, Karin Verspoor,
and Trevor Cohn. 2023. Language models are not
naysayers: An analysis of language models on negation benchmarks. Preprint, arXiv:2306.08189.
Tereza Vrabcová, Marek Kadlčík, Petr Sojka, Michal
Štefánik, and Michal Spiegel. 2025. Negation: A
pink elephant in the large language models’ room?
Preprint, arXiv:2503.22395.
Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy,
Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect
object identification in gpt-2 small.
Preprint,
arXiv:2211.00593.

